You and I make a lot of decisions every day.
Now, some have a little impact on our lives;
others have a very big impact.
And we can appreciate that we can make
choices and decisions for ourselves.
Think of how life would be
if you made no decisions for yourself
—someone tells you when to go to bed,
they pick out your clothes,
and they tell you what to do for work.
Well, none of us would like that!
Jehovah gave each of us free will,
and that’s the precious gift
of making choices for ourselves.
Now, have you ever thought
about why Jehovah gave us this gift?
I mean,
why trust us with free will
when he knew that we could make
bad choices or decisions?
Well, one powerful reason is love.
The only way to give us the gift of love
is also to give us the gift of free will.
The two are tied together.
You really can’t have
one without the other.
For example,
if I programmed my computer
to give me a message
every day at 2:00 p.m.:
“John, I love you.
I think you’re a wonderful guy,”
I think there’d be a little something
wrong with me if I thought:
‘Aw, isn’t that nice?
My computer, it loves me.’
Yeah, love only exists
if it comes truly
from a free-will expression.
Now, did Jehovah place
any boundaries on free will?
Yes.
They were stated in the Law
to the nation of Israel.
And Jesus later repeated them
at Matthew 22:37-40:
“He said to him:
“‘“You must love Jehovah your God
with your whole heart
“‘“and with your whole soul
and with your whole mind.”
“‘This is the greatest
and first commandment.
“‘The second, like it, is this:
“‘“You must love your
neighbor as yourself.”
“‘On these two commandments
the whole Law hangs,
and the Prophets.’”
So our use of free will
has love of God
and love of neighbor
as its boundaries.
Notice, for example,
what people are doing
in this picture,
both inside the circle boundary
and outside.
See, free will allows us to do
any of the things
we see in the picture.
But love of God
and love of neighbor
move us to reject
what’s outside the circle
and choose
to do the kinds of things
that we see inside the circle.
Now, to stay
within those boundaries,
Jehovah gave us
a marvelous brain
and a built-in conscience,
but he also knows
we need more help.
And that’s why
he also gave us Bible principles
—basic truths from the Bible
that can help us
to make good decisions.
And it can safely be said
that any decision we face
can be guided
by Bible principles.
Now, our Creator, Jehovah,
knows what’s best for us.
And he also trusts us
to make decisions
based on Bible principles
because he knows
that when we do that,
then we’re really,
truly going to be happy, content,
and at peace with him
and with others.
So in review so far:
Jehovah gave us free will
—that’s the privilege
to make choices for ourselves—
and he also gave us
Bible principles
as the boundaries
to our choices.
But making difficult decisions
requires that we train ourselves
to recognize Bible principles
and apply them.
Now let’s read Romans 12:1,
and let’s see how this verse
describes the decision-making process.
“Therefore, I appeal to you
“by the compassions of God, brothers,
“to present your bodies
as a living sacrifice,
“holy and acceptable to God,
a sacred service
with your power of reason.”
So are we using
our “power of reason”
to understand Bible principles?
For example, young children
ask lots of questions.
But has a child ever asked you:
“What happens when I drop a ball?
a pencil? a book?”
No, they don’t ask that.
They know what happens
to anything they drop.
It falls down!
See, the child doesn’t need
rules for every object
but has quickly grasped the principle.
Anything he drops falls down.
Now,
what if an 18-year-old asked you,
“What’s going to happen
when I drop this pen?”
Well, it’s obvious
he’s not been paying attention
to basic principles of life.
So by us paying attention
to Bible principles,
`

it won’t obey,
but it’ll pull
the person back from danger.
Now, it can take a year or more
of training for the dog to learn
the amazing skills
that are so helpful to a blind person.
Likewise, our raw,
untrained “power of reason”
can help us to a degree.
However, it can be amazing
if we take the time to train it.
Now, here are
three skills that we can use
to train our “power of reason.”
They are illustrating,
analyzing,
and balancing.
Now, to consider our first skill,
illustrating,
let’s use the general topic
of forgiveness.
What Bible principles
could help with forgiveness?
Please think of as many principles
and scriptures as you can.
Proverbs 12:18 says:
“The tongue of the wise is a healing”;
and Colossians 3:13 tells us
to ‘forgive one another freely.’
Now, the skill
we want to learn is illustrating

and it can also be
quite enjoyable.
You know,
try at your family worship
to take
the principles for a topic
and see
how many similarities,
nf
Did you notice, for example,
what appears to be
a reverse order
of the steps leading to sin?
This verse works its way
from sexual immorality
back to the very roots
of the problem.
Now, let’s take each phrase
starting with the last,
“greediness, which is idolatry.”
So, sexual immorality
starts with selfishness,
greedily putting our needs
ahead of anything else.
smelling the bread and cakes
when he can’t pay for it.
Likewise,
hanging around immoral entertainment
until we’ve learned
all that we can.
And we can use
the many research tools we have
to find valuable comments
and application.
Now, let’s consider our third
and final skill: balancing.
And to do that,
let’s use a question
on the topic of alcohol.
What Bible principles
could help a couple to decide
whether to serve alcohol
at their wedding?
What principles and scriptures
do you think would help them
make a balanced decision?
Again, you’re welcome
to pause the program
if you’d like to write down
what comes to mind
or to research something.
Now, your list probably has
some of these principles.
At John 2:9,
Jesus made wine for a wedding.